## UniRun
Name: James Sanfilippo
Semester: Fall 2024
Personal website: https://www.linkedin.com/in/james-sanfilippo-ii/

### Abstract
In this paper, I will discuss an open-source running app geared towards college students. The app will be called UniRun. It is designed to create a sense of community between college students at the University of Illinois in Urbana-Champaign initially but will be scaled to include other universities. There are many features available in the app and the connectivity with other students who also have a passion for running creates a sense of community around a healthy sport that anyone can engage in on campus. When using the app, runners capture the topography of the terrain of local trails. With geolocating features, this can be shared not only with other UIUC students, but also runners using UniRun on other campuses. Runners at UIUC can receive up to the minute information on the terrain along paths and running routes, so they are better informed on the best route to take on a particular day and can meet up with other runners. The app will show upcoming local events, which will help build a sense of community. The app will also display after-run activities or a meeting place where runners can get food or drinks to sit and connect. As UniRun scales, the app continues to connect runners and universities to compare topography of the runs, statistics, as well as the ability to create a friendly competition between schools. In addition, there will be a built-in chat feature to provide information as well as motivation for other runners. 

With the pilot being UIUC, runners at other universities can share their experiences and feedback on the app. UniRun also has Vlogging capabilities to further enable community users to share their run and experience. Common running paths are continuously created and managed by students who will keep them updated. This allows for students at other universities to know where to run at other schools if they visit. The app will also expand to schedule running events between colleges initially, but this can scale to high school athletes as well between different schools. 

### Introduction  
Throughout all four years of high school, I was a runner in track and cross country, and really enjoyed the sense of community each sport had. This was something I felt I lost when I got to college, as I found it hard to find people to run with. Due to this, I began running much less consistently, and haven’t been able to get back to the same mileage that I was running in high school. This is why I will be discussing an open source health app for college students where they can track their fitness and build community through the sport of running. Running has many benefits especially for university students who have busy schedules and the stress of college-level classes. It is important to exercise for overall health and it provides social and academic benefits. In addition to tracking their runs, the app will have other health benefits that participants can track including their caloric intake and fitness activity. This builds a sense of accomplishment, goal setting and community engagement to cheer each other on in reaching and achieving fitness goals. The data from the app is also captured so health-conscious members can share their results with friends, family and physicians. This app will be geared towards running, and its name will be UniRun. UniRun builds on the importance of connectivity and a sense of community that is important to everyone, but especially so to college students as many times this is the first time they live away from home. The aim of this paper is to apply the course material from IS 340 and describe the purpose of the app and potential as well as how I would manage this open-source project.

### Purpose  
Physical activity is essential to stay healthy. According to a 2019 article in *Sports*, “People active in sports have, in general, better health than those who do not participate in sports, because they are physically and mentally prepared for the challenges of sports, abilities that in many cases can be transferred to other parts of life” (Malm et al., 2019). Although there are many studies that document the important health benefits of physical activity, the most important factors for college students is stress reduction, a sense of community, and overall health.

The app is called UniRun. UniRun is an open source app and allows students to track their runs around their college campuses. The demographic is anyone of college or grad student age at a university campus. There is a community aspect to the UniRun in that it encourages runners not only to connect with other runners at the university but to coordinate running times, dates and social activities afterward. There will be chat features to discuss important runner information such as time of run, distance, places to go for shoes, equipment recommendations, as well as the ability to send alerts for potential hazards on trails. The community aspects of the app offer users the ability to connect and recommend places to eat on campus after a run. UniRun has the ability to track and share runs so that others can support and encourage achievements, motivate, and build a sense of community. Runners can set weekly and monthly goals, which will show on a user’s profile. When a runner achieves a goal, the medal count next to their name will update, so runners have a sense of accomplishment and other community members can comment to congratulate them. There will be a page on their profile that displays each medal, and you can see each goal that was achieved.

The UniRun app will allow universities to connect with each other to compare and contrast runs at their campuses further encouraging a sense of community and providing valuable user mapped trails to the app to expand to other universities around the country and the world. They can describe the topography of the runs using GPS of the phone or watch to track elevation. This can be helpful in climates where there are areas with steep inclines and descents on the run. There is also a safety feature embedded so if a runner gets injured or is in danger, the app notifies their close friends and emergency contacts if enabled. Should they go missing, the app can send the last reported location to their contacts. If the workout ends abruptly such as if the phone gets powered off, the last known location will be sent to friends and emergency contacts. This would be a slightly less serious alert, more of a check-in with your friend as they were running and the workout ended abruptly. This could potentially be a life saving feature if someone gets kidnapped or really injured.

### Target Audience   
The target audience for the app is college age students and grad students. The app allows students with a desire to run to connect with other runners in their university with expansion capabilities including intercollegiate events, and high school students.  
The app can also integrate with other health tools. There is an option for participants to input height, weight and any track other health information in the app including heart rate information that can be shared and accessed by physicians. Data privacy and security are vitally important especially when personal health information is involved. Through the open source project, we will be transparent on how our app collects personal information and all private health information will be compliant with GDPR standards if it reaches our servers, but most health data will stay on-device.

The UniRun app allows college students to share information, build a sense of community and stay healthy in a more social way. It also encourages students from other universities to connect and talk by sharing event information such as half and full marathons. In this way, the community extends beyond the campus and allows students that have like minded health and activity interests to potentially train virtually with each other and meet in person for runs on campuses and meet socially. In addition, other students can coordinate runs to join and meet in person. 

### Key Features
* Route Sharing and Trail Topography: Uses OpenStreetMap and GPS to generate detailed maps with elevation and terrain data.
* Safety Alerts: Sends notifications to contacts if a run ends unexpectedly.
* Social Goals and Achievements: Weekly and monthly targets with medal rewards and profile updates.
* Community Events: Enables runners to post video updates, organize runs, and explore routes others have recommended.
* Intercollegiate sharing: Compare runs and stats across schools to encourage competitive rivalries.

### Strategy and Technology
My development strategy for UniRun will focus on transparency, collaboration, and iterative growth. I plan to build the app using Swift for iOS due to its performance and support for Apple’s health app, and strong integration with location services. The backend will use Firebase, as well as Firestore to manage user-mapped routes, data, and activity. Firebase allows you to easily, “Spin up your backend without managing servers. Effortlessly scale to support millions of users with Firebase databases, machine learning infrastructure, hosting and storage solutions, and Cloud Functions” (Google, n.d.). Geolocation and mapping features will use OpenStreetMap to show terrain and share runs, as I have a good amount of experience working with it. OpenStreetMap also, “emphasizes local knowledge. Contributors use aerial imagery, GPS devices, and low-tech field maps to verify that OSM is accurate and up to date” (OpenStreetMap, n.d.). This also builds upon the principles of open source, as UniRun will use data collected by and maintained by contributors.

All development will be hosted on GitHub to ensure transparency and invite other contributors. Clear documentation and a code of conduct will be used to guide this collaboration. Issues and pull requests will help manage updates. This project will heavily utilize user feedback, and this will help shape development milestones and future features. 

UniRun will launch in phases, starting with basic run tracking and GPS mapping, as I have a lot of experience with those. It will then expand to include the social features including group chats, safety alerts, and intercollegiate leaderboards. I plan to release the app under the MIT License to allow for other developers to fork and adapt it freely. User data will be protected through end-to-end encryption, especially for private runs, and I will ensure that I comply with the GDPR and any US privacy laws. This helps to ensure that the app is scalable, and that it meets the needs of college runners.

UniRun would expand its accessibility to multiple languages as universities globally become part of the community. UniRun provides a built-in option for alumni-student connections as well, so when a UIUC student graduates and relocates potentially after college, they can stay connected to their community through UniRun and instantly have a community to reach out to in other cities. With the open source capabilities, these members can share feedback in their new location with the group and connect with other users in the new area.   
The UniRun app can be a model for other sports apps too if it is successful. For example, expansion capabilities of the app can include a UniBike app which encourages students interested in cycling to join the app and start connecting with other cyclists on campus and at other universities again comparing topography of the trails or rides, and friendly intercollegiate events.

### Community and Engagement  
The continued engagement of the UniRun user community is vital to the success of the app and creates a unique experience that is different from any other app on the market today. This community in an open-source project allows for collaboration from diverse groups of runners that can share their feedback on improvements, new features actual users would like to see as well as potentially solving or alerting the project management team to any bugs and fixes to the app from the community of contributors who have transparent access to the code. This provides valuable information because oftentimes decisions are made on the project manager’s perceived desires of the community, rather than via user feedback. For example, weather can be included in the app for proposed runs. The collaborative nature fosters innovation and the app can evolve over time to meet the changing needs of the running community. For example, users can offer insights on where to find the best shoes, equipment for runners and the ideal running paths in an area.

### Project Management
Development will follow agile project management principles, with short sprints focused on specific milestones. This will help support rapid development and frequent iteration. Tasks will be organized in GitHub Projects using Kanban-style boards to manage issues and milestones transparently. Contributors will work in sprints to focus on specific features, first the initial development, then moving to add safety alerts, leaderboard integration, and other planned features. They will also conduct regular code reviews. 

### Conclusion  
In conclusion, as a runner, I feel that open-source is key to UniRun’s success. The IS 340 course learning and material, and the open source software and tools have enabled me to provide a solid path for this project. I am very excited to pursue it. Having an engaged user community of runners will fuel not only their passion for running, but connectivity to other members. This provides valuable insights and feedback on their goals and interests on the current version of the app. Making the project open-source enables user input and engagement on future features that are sought after by the people who use the app. UniRun enables the community to engage virtually with each other and also enables in person meet ups if the runners on the app are at the same campus. I hope to enable runners to build a community and start running routines. This will give them a sense of belonging and connection as well as assisting with coordination of runs. Information sharing on runs can also be key if there is a health or safety hazard. This is in addition to motivating people to exercise more and reap the health benefits. The community can engage in experiences as well as running equipment feedback on shoes, weather gear for running and other accessories. With the success of the UniRun app, there is potential to utilize the open-source model and ask the community about other sports such as UniBike and expand the app features to include a model for university students similarly in that sport. The open-source model provides the UniRun app with sustainability and solid user engagement, which accelerates the app's potential for growth. The app can be a key tool for users to achieve both their fitness goals and engage with a community.

### References:

OpenStreetMap. (n.d.). OpenStreetMap. OpenStreetMap. https://www.openstreetmap.org/about  
Google. (n.d.). Firebase. Firebase Documentation. https://firebase.google.com/docs  
Malm, C., Jakobsson, J., & Isaksson, A. (2019). Physical Activity and Sports-Real Health Benefits: A Review with Insight into the Public Health of Sweden. Sports (Basel, Switzerland), 7(5), 127\. https://doi.org/10.3390/sports7050127

